## Page 1

Article
Optimized reporters for multiplexed detection of
transcription factor activity
Graphical abstract
Highlights
d Systematic design and optimization of transcriptional
reporters for 86 TFs
d Characterization of TF-speciﬁc reporter design
optimization rules
d Evaluation of reporter TF speciﬁcity across a wide array of TF
perturbations
d Identiﬁcation of a collection of 62 ‘‘prime’’ TF reporters with
optimized performance
Authors
Max Trauernicht, Teodora Filipovska,
Chaitanya Rastogi, Bas van Steensel
Correspondence
b.v.steensel@nki.nl
In brief
Direct measurements of transcription
factor (TF) activity are crucial for
understanding how TFs interpret signals
and drive gene expression. TF reporter
constructs have been widely used to
detect activity in cell signaling,
developmental biology, and disease
models. However, many mammalian TFs
lack reliable reporters. In this study, a
library of reporters for 86 TFs was
designed and evaluated to identify
optimized ‘‘prime’’ TF reporters.
Trauernicht et al., 2024, Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122
December 18, 2024 ª 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2024.11.003
ll

## Page 2

Article
Optimized reporters for multiplexed
detection of transcription factor activity
Max Trauernicht,1 Teodora Filipovska,1 Chaitanya Rastogi,2 and Bas van Steensel1,3,*
1Oncode Institute, Division of Gene Regulation and Division of Molecular Genetics, Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam, the
Netherlands
2Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
3Lead contact
*Correspondence: b.v.steensel@nki.nl
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2024.11.003
SUMMARY
In any given cell type, dozens of transcription factors (TFs) act in concert to control the activity of the genome
by binding to speciﬁc DNA sequences in regulatory elements. Despite their considerable importance, we
currently lack simple tools to directly measure the activity of many TFs in parallel. Massively parallel reporter
assays (MPRAs) allow the detection of TF activities in a multiplexed fashion; however, we lack basic understanding to rationally design sensitive reporters for many TFs. Here, we use an MPRA to systematically optimize transcriptional reporters for 86 TFs and evaluate the speciﬁcity of all reporters across a wide array of TF
perturbation conditions. We thus identiﬁed critical TF reporter design features and obtained highly sensitive
and speciﬁc reporters for 62 TFs, many of which outperform available reporters. The resulting collection of
‘‘prime’’ TF reporters can be used to uncover TF regulatory networks and to illuminate signaling pathways.
A record of this paper’s transparent peer review process is included in the supplemental information.
INTRODUCTION
Intra- and extracellular signals intricately control the activity of
dozens of interwoven signaling pathways, often converging on
transcription factors (TFs). TFs respond to these upstream
signaling cascades and translate them to orchestrate the regulation of the genome. If we knew the activity of all TFs in any given
cell type, we might be able to understand how TFs interpret
incoming signals, how they drive the downstream changes in
gene expression, and how cascades of TF activities progress
over time. However, we currently have no reliable method to
directly detect many TF activities in parallel.
A variety of computational approaches have been developed
to infer TF activities from genome-wide data such as TF-binding
data (chromatin immunoprecipitation [ChIP] sequencing1), chromatin accessibility maps (assay for transposase-accessible
chromatin [ATAC] sequencing2),3,4 TF or target gene transcript
abundance data (RNA sequencing [RNA-seq]5),6–8 or a combination of these methods.9–11 While these methods provide convenient tools to compute TF activities from well-established genomics assays, they do not directly measure the transcriptional
activity of TFs and might therefore lack precision. For example,
it is known that maps of TF binding poorly reﬂect TF activity12,13;
ATAC-seq detects open chromatin regions, which are not
necessarily predictive of transcription activity14; and inferring
TF activity from mRNA-seq data requires assumptions regarding
the distance over which each TF may be able to control gene
activity.
Traditional reporter assays offer a direct method for measuring
TF activities by using ﬂuorescent or luminescent proteins that are
expressed by TF response sequences.15–25 These assays have
been used for decades and detect TF activity with great sensitivity. However, conventional reporter assays do not allow to
detect multiple TFs at once. A previous study circumvented
this limitation and measured 58 TF activities in parallel from previously published TF reporters by utilizing RNA barcodes as
reporters.26 This study also showed that TF reporter measurements can be more accurate than RNA-seq-inferred TF activities
for a subset of TFs. Thus, directly measuring TF activities in a
high-throughput fashion using barcoded reporters offers a
direct and precise alternative to computational inference
approaches.
Despite the advantages of multiplexed TF reporter assays,
there are still several challenges in achieving accurate high-throughput TF activity detection. First, reporters are only available
for a limited number of TFs. Expanding the collection of TF reporters will be crucial to make multiplexed reporter assays more
scalable. Second, most of the published TF reporters rely on
either (1) TF response elements found in the genome,17,18,22,23
which might lack speciﬁcity to the intended TF due to the presence of other TF-binding sites (TFBSs), or (2) poorly optimized
synthetic TF response sequences,15,16,27 which could be suboptimal in terms of sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Hence, it is necessary
to optimize TF reporters to obtain more reliable activity measurements. Finally, it is known that TFs within the same TF family,
especially TF paralogs, can have highly similar DNA-binding
Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024 ª 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. 1107
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
ll
OPEN ACCESS

## Page 3

Figure 1. Systematic design and probing of TF reporters
(A) Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualization of motif similarities (Pearson correlation coefﬁcient [PCC]) of all human TFs (n = 1,244).28
The selected 86 motifs are highlighted in red. Local clusters of TF families are annotated.
(B) Design of the TF reporter library. Four copies of the TFBS are placed around variable spacer sequences and spacer lengths upstream of a core promoter and a
unique barcode. The arrow in the core promoter indicates the transcription start site.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
1108 Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024

## Page 4

domains and thus also highly similar TFBSs, which complicates
the design of reporters that are speciﬁc for a single TF.
Here, we report the generation of highly optimized reporters for
a large collection of TFs. Our aim was to identify reporter designs
that would allow for measurements of the activity of individual TFs
with the highest possible sensitivity and speciﬁcity. With a few exceptions (see below), we did not consider combinatorial activity of
multiple TFs. In order to test a large number of candidate reporters, we made use of massively parallel reporter assays
(MPRAs) with a systematically designed library of 5,530 different
reporter designs for 86 TFs, including TFs that respond to diverse
signaling pathways and a variety of cell-type-speciﬁc TFs. For
each TF, we optimized the design of the reporter by varying the
spacer sequences and spacer length between TFBSs, the distance to the core promoter and the core promoter itself. We evaluated the speciﬁcity and sensitivity of the generated TF reporters
by probing the library across nine cell lines and almost 100 TF
perturbation conditions. Detailed analysis of this rich dataset provided insights into the rules that determine the sensitivity and
speciﬁcity of reporters for each TF and yielded a collection of
‘‘prime’’ reporters for 62 TFs, for many of which no reporters
were available yet. Our synthetic prime reporters outperform published reporters in >80% of all comparisons. We demonstrate the
utility of the identiﬁed prime reporter set by detecting signaling
pathway interdependencies upon pluripotency-challenging perturbations in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs).
RESULTS
Systematic probing of a TF reporter library
A main challenge in the design of speciﬁc TF reporters is the similarity between binding motifs of TFs. Therefore, to select TFs for
which the generation of TF-speciﬁc reporters would be feasible,
we manually examined all human TFs and reviewed their (1) TF
motif quality (i.e., motif length and information content), (2) the
number of TFs with a similar motif, (3) expression pattern across
cell types, and (4) stimulation and perturbation opportunities.
Based on these criteria, we selected a list of 86 TFs (Table S1).
For each TF, we selected the best motif according to a previous
motif curation.28 We also included several heterodimeric motifs
(e.g., POU5F1::SOX2), for which we carefully reviewed available
motifs. Most of the selected TFs have unique motifs (i.e., no other
TF has a similar motif, Figure S1A) and cover a large diversity of
the human TF motif landscape (Figure 1A). The selected 86 TFs
include most well-known TFs downstream of generic signaling
pathways such as mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK),
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT, transforming growth
factor b (TGF-b), WNT, and Janus kinase-signal transducer
and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT), as well as a diversity
of nuclear receptors and tissue-speciﬁc and pluripotency-speciﬁc TFs (Tables 1 and S1).
We then generated a library consisting of synthetic reporters
for the selected 86 TFs. For each TF, we generated a consensus
TFBS by choosing the most conserved base at each position of
its motif. We also included two sets of negative control TFBSs.
First, for each TF, we generated a matched mutated TFBS in
which two to four conserved bases of the TFBS were modiﬁed
(Table S1). Second, we designed three distinct 11 bp random sequences that are devoid of any known activator TFBS (TF-neg)
that served as generic negative controls and were used for
normalization. To generate synthetic TF reporter sequences,
we placed four copies of the TFBSs in front of a core promoter
that drives the transcription of a unique 13-bp barcode sequence
and a GFP open reading frame (Figure 1B). We chose to use four
copies of TFBSs because this number was shown to yield optimal
activation for many TFs.29–32 We then systematically varied
several design parameters for each TFBS (Figure 1B). First, we
designed three spacer sequences around the four TFBSs of
either 5 or 10 bp (i.e., TFBS1-spacer1-TFBS2-spacer2-TFBS3-
spacer3-TFBS4). These spacer sequences were computationally
designed to minimize occurrences of other TFBSs, even in the
junctions between the spacer sequences and the TFBSs (Figure S1B). For each spacer length (5 and 10 bp), we then selected
three distinct sets of spacer sequences. Second, we coupled the
TFBSs to three different core promoters (minP, derived from
pGL4 [Promega, Madison, WI, USA], minCMV,33 and for some
TFs also minHBG34). Third, we placed the core promoter at either
10 or 21 bp from the nearest TFBS. Together, the combination of
these design parameters yielded 36 reporter designs for TFs with
minHBG, and 24 for TFs without. Additionally, for comparison, we
also included previously established and published reporter sequences for 65 TFs from three different public sources (see
STAR Methods and Table S1).26,27 A set of 120 enhancer fragments from the mouse Klf2 locus (previously shown to be active
in MPRAs inmESCs),35 and 86reporters with aTFBS-devoid core
promoter (one for each TF) were included as positive and negative controls, respectively (see STAR Methods). Together, this
yielded a collection of in total 5,530 unique reporter sequences.
Finally, each of these sequences was coupled to 5–8 distinct
barcodes to minimize biases caused by individual barcodes,
yielding a library of 35,500 barcoded reporters.
Among the 86 included TFs are many tissue-speciﬁc TFs. We
therefore probed the reporter library in nine different cell lines
from distinct tissues (Figure 1C). Since TF-binding speciﬁcities
are highly conserved between human and mouse,36,37 we tested
the library in cell lines derived from both human (n = 7) and mouse
(n = 2). Furthermore, we extensively perturbed TF activities by (1)
activating or inhibiting upstream signaling pathways (n = 25) or
(2) changing the TF abundance by overexpressing, knocking
down or degrading individual TFs (n = 73). We thus queried all
5,530 reporters across 98 TF perturbation conditions (Figure 1C;
Table S2).
(C) Experimental layout. The TF reporter plasmid library was probed in nine distinct cell lines and in 98 TF perturbation conditions. Barcodes are then counted per
condition from RNA (reverse transcribed to cDNA) using high-throughput sequencing. To calculate reporter activities, RNA barcode counts were normalized to
the input plasmid DNA barcode counts and then to the normalized median count of the TF-neg reporters.
(D) Correlation of all reporter activities (i.e., activation compared with TF-neg reporters) measured in biological replicate 1 compared with replicate 2 of reporters
with mutated TFBSs (gray) and consensus TFBSs (red). Reporter activities in all nine cell lines are displayed together.
(E) Activities of individual reporter designs per TF in mNPCs and mESCs. Highlighted in green are mESC-speciﬁc TFs in this comparison. Red line indicates
median activity per TF. Published reporters are not displayed.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024 1109

## Page 5

For each tested condition or cell line, we ﬁrst normalized the
barcode counts in the mRNA to the barcode counts in the
input plasmid DNA. Activities were then computed from the
plasmid DNA-normalized counts by calculating the induction
over the median counts of the collection of the TF-neg reporters (Figure 1C). This was done separately per core promoter. Reporter activities between individual barcodes correlated highly (Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient [PCC] range
0.84–0.87, Figure S1C) and were averaged. We probed the reporter library per cell line in at least three (HEK293, K562) and
up to 11 (mESCs) biological replicates, yielding per cell line an
average PCC between replicates of 0.77–0.94 (Figure S1D). For
downstream analyses we averaged the reporter activities of
the replicates. As expected, reporters with consensus TFBSs
were more active than reporters with minimal mutations in
the TFBS in all nine tested cell lines (Figures 1D and S1E).
Furthermore, the synthetic TF reporters reached activities as
high as the genomic enhancer element reporters, showing
that four copies of the same TFBS are as potent as highly
active native enhancer elements of approximately the same
length (Figure S1F).
We ﬁrst characterized activities for all TFs and their 24–36 reporter designs across the nine probed cell lines. We found that
known generic TFs displayed activities in all cell lines (e.g.,
ELK1, FOS::JUN), while known cell-type-speciﬁc TFs were predominantly detected in a subset of cell lines (e.g., the liver-speciﬁc TFs HNF1A and HNF4A in the liver cancer cell line HEPG2),
and some were not active in any cell type (e.g., vitamin D receptor [VDR], see below; Figure S2). Next, to explore these cell-typespeciﬁc activities in more detail, we focused on two different cell
lines:
mESCs
and
mESC-derived
neural
precursor
cells
(mNPCs). As expected, the reporter activities differed for many
TFs between the two different cell lines (Figure 1E). TFs that displayed substantially higher activity in mESCs compared with
mNPCs included POU5F1::SOX2, TFCP2L1, KLF4, POU5F1,
STAT3, TCF7L2, SOX2, and TCF7 (Figure 1E, highlighted in
green), which are known activating TFs of the mESC pluripotency network.38,39
Notably, for several TFs, the reporter designs showed substantial differences in activity, despite having identical TFBSs.
For instance, in mESCs, some STAT3 reporter designs were as
inactive as the TF-neg control reporters, while others were up
to 25-fold more active than those controls (Figure 1E, highlighted
in bold and green). This indicates that the design of the reporter
can have substantial effects on its activity.
Understanding TF-speciﬁc reporter design rules
To investigate the relation between reporter design and reporter
activity, we ﬁtted for each TF a log-linear model using the reporter design features (core promoter identity, promoter distance, spacer sequence, and length) as categorical input variables
(Figure 2A). This analysis enabled us to extract which features
contribute to the variation in reporter activity. For example, for
STAT3 the model accurately reﬂected the measured reporter activities (adjusted R2 = 0.95; Figure 2B) and indicated that spacer
length and spacer sequence were crucial to achieve high transcriptional activity, while promoter identity contributed moderately, and promoter distance was largely irrelevant (Figure 2C).
This suggested that STAT3 is more active with TFBSs spaced
Table 1. Overview of the selected TFs and their primary
associated cellular functions
TF
Main cellular function
AHR::ARNT, NR1I2, NR1I3
xenobiotic stress response
AR
testosterone response
CEBPB, NFKB1, NR4A1,
NR4A2, FOS::JUN, (ATF2)
inﬂammation
CREB1
cyclic AMP
E2F1, MYBL2, TP53, (CEBPA)
cell cycle
EGR1, ELK1, ETS2, SRF
MAPK
ESR1
estrogen response
ESRRB, KLF4, POU5F1,
SOX2, ZFP42, ZFX
pluripotency
FOXA1, FOSL1
cell identity, development
FOXO1
PI3K/AKT
GATA1
erythroid development
GATA4
cardiac development
GBX2, HOMEZ, IRX3, NEUROG2,
NFIA, OTX1, RFX1
neural development
GLI1
hedgehog
GRHL1
epithelial development
HNF1A, HNF4A, ONECUT1
hepatic gene activation
HSF1
heat shock response
IRF3, STAT1::2, (IRF1), (STAT1)
interferon, immune response
MAF::NFE2, NFE2L2
oxidative stress response
MEF2A
myocyte development
MTF1
metal response
NFAT5, NFATC1
osmotic stress response
NFYA, SP1
constitutive activator
NR1D1, (CLOCK)
circadian rhythm
NR1H2, PPARA, PPARG,
(TFEB), (SREBF1)
lipid metabolism
NR1H4, NR5A2
bile acid response
NR3C1
glucocorticoid response
NR3C2
mineralocorticoid response
PAX6
neural and pancreatic
development
PGR
progesterone response
POU2F1, RORA, TFAP2A,
NRF1, WT1, (MYC), (GATA3)
various
RARA, RXRA
retinoic acid response
RBPJ
notch signaling
RUNX2, SOX9
osteoblast development
SMAD2::3::4, SMAD4
TGF-b signaling
STAT3, (STAT4), (STAT6)
JAK-STAT signaling
TCF7, TCF7L2
WNT signaling
TEAD1
hippo signaling
THRA, THRB
thyroid hormone response
VDR
vitamin D3 response
XBP1, (ATF4), (ATF6)
unfolded protein response
(HIF1A)
hypoxia response
Note that some TFs might have multiple functions. TFs for which only
published reporters were included are displayed in parentheses.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
1110 Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024

## Page 6

by 10 bp and that the spacer sequence can strongly impact reporter activity, even though the spacers were designed not to
contain any known TF motif.
Next, we asked whether active TF reporters can be designed
according to universal reporter design rules, or whether each TF
requires its own speciﬁc rules. We applied the log-linear model
Figure 2. Identiﬁcation of design features causative of TF reporter activity
(A) Equation of the log-linear model. Reporter design features are indicated by color and reﬂect the reporter design cartoon underneath the equation.
(B) Correlation between measured STAT3 reporter activities and predicted reporter activities by the log-linear model in mESCs. Color coded are the two spacer
lengths.
(C) Weights of the individual coefﬁcients of the STAT3 log-linear model. The color indicates the strength of the weight.
(D) Coefﬁcient weight heatmap for all TFs with a signiﬁcant log-linear model ﬁt and a total explained variance of >50%. As in (C), all weights are computed in
contrast to the reference variables minP (core promoter), 10 bp (promoter distance), and #1 (spacer sequence). Weights of features that did not signiﬁcantly
contribute to the model (p R 0.1) are set to 0 in this visualization. TFs highlighted in red display spacer sequence preferences, TFs in blue spacer length preferences. TFs indicated in bold are mentioned in the text.
(E) Total variance explained by the individual design features for all TFs displayed in (D). Red line indicates the median. The color of the dots indicates the total
explained variance of the log-linear model. Statistical signiﬁcance of the difference in variance explained was tested using unpaired Student’s t tests, ***p < 0.001.
(F) Average difference between the weights of 10-bp spacer sequences in the log-linear model and the 5-bp spacer sequences, separately per monomeric and
dimeric/multimeric TFBSs. The color of the dots indicates TFs with consistent preference for 5-bp (light blue) or 10-bp spacer lengths (dark blue). Statistical
signiﬁcance of the difference in variance is estimated by Levene’s test.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024 1111

## Page 7

analysis to each of the 86 TFs, focusing on the cell line and culture condition in which the TF is most active (see STAR
Methods). For 65 out of 86 TFs (76%) the models reached statistical signiﬁcance (adjusted p < 0.05; Figure S3A) and explained
>50% of the variance in reporter activity. For these models, we
then extracted the underlying weights of the individual reporter
design features (Figure 2D). This analysis revealed several
important insights. First, for almost all tested TFs, reporters
were more active when having a minCMV or minHBG promoter
compared with a minP promoter. Note that the ﬁtted activities
are normalized to the background activity of the core promoter
(as described above), i.e., reporter activities are deﬁned here
as the TF-induced activity change compared with the promoter-only activity. Thus, minCMV and minHBG promoters allow
for stronger induction, regardless of the TF. Second, although
the promoter distance explained the least variance compared
with all other investigated features (Figures 2D and 2E), the majority of TFs had a slightly decreased activity when the core promoter was placed 21 bp away from the ﬁrst TFBS instead of
10 bp. This suggests that for many TFs, placing the TFBS closer
to the TSS can subtly increase transcription activity.
Besides the generic role of the core promoter and the core
promoter distance, we found a striking TF-speciﬁc role for
the spacer length between the TFBSs. For 13 TFs, all three
10-bp
spacer
sequences
consistently
increased
activity
compared with the 5-bp spacer sequences (Figure 2D, TFs
highlighted in dark blue). A readily interpretable example is
HNF4A, for which >90% of all variance in the reporter activity
was caused by changing the spacer length from 5 to 10 bp
(Figures 2D and 2E); this increased reporter activity by roughly
8-fold on average (Figure S3B). Conversely, eight TFs had signiﬁcant negative weights for all three 10-bp spacer sequences
and hence favored the shorter 5-bp spacer length (Figure 2D,
highlighted in light blue). We then examined in greater detail
which TFs exhibited these spacer length preferences. Interestingly, we observed that TFs that bind DNA as monomers
tended to be unaffected by changes in spacer length, while
dimeric or multimeric TFs had signiﬁcantly stronger spacer
length preferences (Figure 2F). In fact, 20 out of 21 TFs with
consistent spacer length preferences were TFs that bind to
its TFBS as dimer or multimer. Possibly, dimeric or multimeric
TF assemblies have more complex DNA interactions and might
therefore need precise relative positioning to be able to activate
efﬁciently from adjacent TFBSs. For some TFs (e.g., CREB129
and TP5332), it was previously described that optimal helical
positioning of adjacent TFBSs (i.e., on the same face of the
DNA helix) facilitates robust activation. We found similar
TFBS spacer length preferences for these described TFs and
identiﬁed many more candidate TFs that might have similar helical positioning dependencies.
Besides TFs that clearly require certain spacer lengths to
effectively activate, several TFs showed strong preferences for
individual spacer sequences (Figure 2D, highlighted in red). For
GATA4, for instance, only spacer sequence #6 (spacer length
of 10 bp) signiﬁcantly contributed to reporter activity, while for
TEAD1 spacer sequence #1 (spacer length of 5 bp) was the
only spacer sequence with strong activation. These speciﬁc
preferences might be caused by an increased or decreased afﬁnity for TF binding due to the sequences surrounding the
TFBS, as has been reported before.40,41 Although we ensured
that all spacer sequences are devoid of any known TFBS, we
cannot rule out that an unknown TF binds the spacer and synergizes with the TF for which the reporter was designed. Together,
our log-linear model analysis revealed that TF reporter design
can be optimized regardless of the TF through the choice and
positioning of the core promoter. Nevertheless, many TFs
require TF-speciﬁc spacer lengths or spacer sequences for efﬁ-
cient activation, underscoring the importance of systematic reporter design optimization.
Cell-type dependence of TF reporter activities
After identifying the features facilitating high reporter activity, we
aimed to characterize the TF speciﬁcity of each reporter. One line
of evidence for such speciﬁcity would be if the activity of a reporter correlates positively with the abundance of the corresponding TF across the nine tested cell lines. Therefore, we
generated mRNA-seq data for mNPCs, mESCs, and HEPG2
cells and collected publicly available mRNA-seq data for the
other six probed cell lines (see STAR Methods and Figure S4A).
We then conducted a transcript abundance correlation analysis
for 37 TFs that showed sufﬁcient variation in expression level
across the cell lines (Figure 3A). For some TFs (e.g., POU5F1::
SOX2, HNF1A), the activities of all reporters signiﬁcantly correlated with TF transcript abundance. For other TFs (e.g., IRX3),
none of the reporters had a signiﬁcant correlation. While this
could indicate that the reporters for these TFs lack speciﬁcity,
it is also possible that the activity of those TFs is controlled primarily by intracellular signaling or by certain co-factors; alternatively, their protein abundance is not reliably predicted by their
mRNA level.
For most TFs, only a subset of reporters signiﬁcantly correlated with TF transcript abundance (e.g., GATA4, GATA1,
TFCP2L1, and GBX2; Figure 3A, highlighted in red). For example,
for GATA4, which is an important regulator of the endoderm42
and is highest expressed in HEPG2 cells among our set of investigated cell lines, one reporter with spacer sequence #4 was not
active in any cell type, but the same reporter design (i.e., the
same core promoter, promoter distance, and spacer length)
with spacer sequence #6 was highly activated speciﬁcally in
HEPG2 (Figure 3B). Indeed, all GATA4 reporters with spacer
sequence #6 displayed activities that signiﬁcantly correlated
with GATA4 transcript abundance (Figure S4B), suggesting
that this spacer sequence renders GATA4 reporters GATA4 speciﬁc. In line with these ﬁndings, spacer sequence #6 was also
identiﬁed as the most important feature in the log-linear model
for GATA4 (note that this model was ﬁt in HEPG2, Figure 2D).
We observed a similar spacer sequence-dependent TF speciﬁcity for GBX2, which is a TF involved in maintaining pluripotency38,39 and is mainly expressed in mESCs. GBX2 reporters
with a spacer sequence #3, but not any other spacer sequence,
displayed activity speciﬁcally in mESCs (Figures 3C and S4C).
For GATA1, which is an important regulator in erythroid cell
gene expression43 and is only highly expressed in erythroleukemic cell line K562, reporters were more K562-speciﬁc with a
10 bp rather than a 21 bp promoter distance (Figures 2D, 3D,
and S4D). The latter displayed activity in GATA1-lacking cell
types, possibly because these reporters respond to other
GATAs (e.g., GATA3 in MCF7 or GATA4 in HEPG2). TFCP2L1,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
1112 Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024

## Page 8

a TF involved in maintaining pluripotency,38,39 gives another
example of reporter design-dependent TF speciﬁcity. We found
that a TFCP2L1 reporter with a 10-bp spacer length (spacer
sequence #4) was predominantly active in the cell line where
TFCP2L1 is highly expressed (mESC), while the same reporter
with a 5 bp spacer length (spacer sequence #1) was also highly
active in other cell types (Figure 3E). Indeed, all TFCP2L1 reporters with spacer sequence #4 and #5 (both 10 bp) displayed
activities that signiﬁcantly correlated with TFCP2L1 transcript
abundance (Figure S4E). Activities of TFCP2L1 reporters in
TFCP2L1-lacking cell types might be explained by response to
GRHL1, which is a TF with a highly similar binding motif (Figure S1A), but a distinct expression pattern (GRHL1 is lowly expressed in all nine cell lines). Together, these ﬁndings highlight
that ﬁne-tuning the reporter design can substantially improve
the speciﬁcity, even for TFs with highly similar TFBSs.
Figure 3. Investigating cell-type speciﬁcity of reporters
(A) Correlations between TF reporter activities and TF transcript abundances across the nine probed cell lines per TF. Only TFs with variable expression across the
nine cell lines are included (see STAR Methods). The black solid line indicates the mean PCC per TF. TFs highlighted in red are mentioned in the text. Dots
highlighted with a red stroke are depicted in (B)–(E).
(B) Correlation between GATA4 transcript abundance and reporter activity for a highly (spacer sequence #6) and a poorly correlating reporter (spacer sequence
#4). The two displayed reporters are identical except for the spacer sequence mentioned above the panels. Cell lines are color coded. Solid line indicates linear
regression, gray shade indicates standard deviation. nTPM, normalized transcripts per million (see STAR Methods).
(C) Same as (B) but for GBX2 reporters.
(D) Same as (B), but for GATA1 and two promoter distances.
(E) Same as (B), but for TFCP2L1 and two spacer lengths.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024 1113

## Page 9

Response of TF reporters to pathway stimulation and
inactivation
Many TFs are known to depend on speciﬁc stimuli or upstream
signaling events for their activity. To further test the responsiveness of the reporters, we therefore applied a total of 23 different
pathway inhibitors, ligands, drugs, and culture conditions that
are known to inﬂuence the activity of at least one of the TFs (Figure 4A; Table S3). For each perturbation we chose, one cell type
that was most likely responsive to this stimulus. Altogether, we
expected these perturbations to activate 27 TFs and suppress
9 TFs within our set of 86 TFs.
For some of those TFs (e.g., WNT pathway mediator TCF7
upon removal of WNT activator CHIR-99021), we saw robust responses across almost all reporter designs (Figure 4A). The most
potent TF-stimulating condition was activation of VDR reporters
by its ligand calcitriol. In U2OS cells this yielded activation levels
up to 180-fold (Figures 4A and 4B). Other strong reporter responses were also achieved by stimulating the heat-shockresponsive HSF1 at 43 C (Figure 4C); the bile acid receptor
NR1H4 by the bile acid CDCA (Figure 4D), the oxidative stress
response factor NFE2L2 by treatment with hydroquinone (Figure 4E), the cyclic AMP (cAMP)-responsive TF CREB1 by
cAMP activator forskolin (Figure 4F), and STAT3 by removal of
JAK-STAT activator leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) (Figure 4G).
Overall, there was a marked variation in the strength of the
response between reporters of the same TF. The strength of
the responses in the examples above strongly depended on
the core promoter (VDR, HSF1, and NR1H4), or the spacer sequences (NFE2L2 and STAT3), which is in line with the ﬁndings
of the log-linear model (Figure 2D). For other TFs (e.g.,
AHR::ARNT, NR4A2), only a few the reporters showed a clear
response (fold-change > 2). The published reporters for VDR
and NR1H4 showed a relatively poor response, as did a subset
of the published NFE2L2, CREB1, HSF1, and STAT3 reporters.
In total, of the 36 TFs targeted by the 23 perturbations, for 28
TFs we identiﬁed at least one reporter that responded in the expected direction by at least 2-fold (Figure 4A).
Testing reporters by TF depletion or overexpression
Finally, as a more direct method of perturbing TF activity, we
tested the response of all reporters to transient knockdown
(KD), protein degradation, or overexpression of individual TFs.
Among our set of 86 TFs, we knocked down 16 TFs in mESCs
and 28 TFs in HEPG2 cells by RNA interference. For SOX2 and
POU5F1, we additionally used degron-mediated depletion in
mESCs.44 Moreover, to evaluate speciﬁcity and off-target responses of the TF reporters, we also included nine KDs in
mESCs and 13 KDs in HEPG2 cells of related TFs that have
similar TFBSs as our candidate TFs. Finally, we overexpressed
four TFs that are not naturally expressed in mESCs. To validate
the experimental design, we tested and conﬁrmed efﬁcient
downregulation of three of the TFs that were targeted by KD in
HEPG2 cells using RNA-seq (Figure S5A). However, the scale
of the perturbation experiments prohibited the veriﬁcation of
the KD or overexpression efﬁciency for each individual TF. For
this reason, a lack of a response of reporters to the perturbation
of their cognate TF does not necessarily imply that the reporters
lack speciﬁcity; it is possible that we simply failed to alter the
level of the TF sufﬁciently. Conversely, however, a strong
response of reporters to the perturbation of the cognate TF
can be regarded as evidence of speciﬁcity.
The results of these experiments are summarized in Figure 5A.
Approximately one-third of all KD-targeted TFs showed a strong
decrease in reporter activity (fold-change > 2) across the majority
of reporters, although for most of these TFs the strength of the
response varied substantially between reporters. Protein degradation of SOX2 strongly reduced activities of all POU5F1::SOX2
reporters, and a subset of SOX2 reporters. Similarly, POU5F1
degradation decreased activity of a subset of POU5F1 reporters
and all POU5F1::SOX2 reporters. Overexpression of FOXA1
substantially increased the activity of the majority of the
FOXA1 reporters, while FOSL1 overexpression only led to an increase in FOS::JUN, but not FOSL1 reporter activities. GATA1
and NR4A2 overexpression did not increase activities of their
target reporters.
Again, we found that the reporter responses were often
dependent on the precise design. While all POU5F1::SOX2 reporters strongly reduced their activity upon POU5F1 degradation (Figure 5B), there was a marked difference in response to
SOX2 degradation, with POU5F1::SOX2 reporters with a 10-bp
spacer length showing stronger responses (Figure 5C). Similarly,
we found that PAX6 reporters with reduced activity upon PAX6
KD mostly had 10-bp spacers, while the published PAX6 reporters did not show any response (Figure 5D). Other examples
of design-dependent responses are highlighted in Figures 5E–
5G. Overall, of the 44 TFs that were targeted by KD, 34 had at
least one reporter with a more than 2-fold reduction in activity
(Figure 5A).
Many TFs belong to families that share highly similar binding
motifs. Therefore, to test for off-target responses, we also evaluated responses upon perturbations of other members within
the same TF family. In total, we investigated 50 pathway perturbations and 87 TF perturbations that could potentially result in
cross-reactivity due to TFBS similarity of the target TF and
another TF. Of these, reporters for around 20 TFs showed substantial off-target responses (Figures S5B and S5C). A striking
example of high selectivity is NR1H4 reporters, which have a
TFBS that is highly similar to other nuclear receptor TFBSs (Figure S1A); nevertheless, they strongly responded only to bile acid
stimulation (CDCA) and not to any other nuclear receptor stimulation (Figure S5D). Off-target responses often varied in magnitude depending on the reporter design. For example, all
GRHL1 reporters had a reduced activity upon KD of GRHL1,
while only GRHL1 reporters with spacer sequences #1–4 additionally responded to TFCP2L1 KD (Figure 5H). We found that
CLOCK reporters, for which we only probed published reporter
designs, reduced their activity by approximately 2-fold upon
removal of LIF (Figure S5E); these reporters carry a repeat
sequence that signiﬁcantly matches the STAT3 motif (Figure S5F), possibly explaining the erroneous response to LIF.
A collection of prime TF reporters
Using the abundance of the cell-type-speciﬁc activities and the
perturbation data described above, we aimed to integrate all
data to identify the most optimal reporters for each TF. To do
so, we assigned conﬁdence levels to each individual reporter,
ranging from 0 (low conﬁdence) to 4 (very-high conﬁdence),
based on the criteria summarized in Figure 6A. For level 4, we
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
1114 Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024

## Page 10

required reporters to display high and explainable activities (according to the log-linear model), have activities that correlate
with the abundance of the TF across the tested cell lines, and
show a substantial response to a relevant signaling pathway or
TF perturbation, without responding to off-target perturbations.
Figure 6B illustrates how each of the conﬁdence level criteria
Figure 4. Response to signaling pathway perturbations
(A) Change in TF reporter activities upon signaling pathway perturbations. Shown are only the responses of the direct targets of the perturbations. Activating
perturbations are shown in blue, repressing conditions in orange. Conditions that were selected as best perturbation condition for the TF (i.e., strongest average
response of the tested perturbations for that TF, see STAR Methods) are denoted by an asterisk. TFs highlighted in the text are indicated in bold. TFs depicted in
(B)–(G) are indicated by letter. LIF, leukemia inhibitory factor; PMA, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate; HQ, hydroquinone; CDCA, chenodeoxycholic acid.
(B–G) Response of reporters of six different TFs to TF-targeted pathway perturbation conditions. TFs for which reporters are displayed is denoted on top of each
ﬁgure. Reporter activities (log2) in the basal condition are displayed on the x axis and in the perturbation condition on the y axis. Reporter design features are
indicated by color, published reporters by shape.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024 1115

## Page 11

contributes to the conﬁdence scores of all FOXA1 reporters. Out
of 29 reporters, seven had a conﬁdence level of 0 or 1 because
they did not display any signiﬁcant activity and also did not
respond to FOXA1 overexpression. These were exclusively published FOXA1 reporters or reporters with a 5-bp spacer length.
Twelve reporters were assigned as level 4 because they
Figure 5. Response of reporters to direct TF perturbation
(A) Change in TF reporter activities upon direct TF perturbation. In some cases the target TF consists of two TFs (e.g., POU5F1::SOX2); the perturbed TF is then
indicated in the x axis labels. TF overexpression is shown in black, TF knockdown in orange, and TF degradation in green. Conditions that were selected as best
perturbation condition for the TF are denoted by asterisk. TFs highlighted in the text are indicated in bold. TFs depicted in (B)–(H) are indicated by letter.
(B–G) Response of TF reporters to six different direct TF perturbation conditions. TFs for which reporters are displayed is denoted on top of each ﬁgure. Reporter
activities (log2) in the basal condition are displayed on the x axis and in the TF perturbation condition on the y axis.
(H) Response of GRHL1 reporters to GRHL1 (y axis) and TFCP2L1 knockdown (x axis).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
1116 Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024

## Page 12

Figure 6. Identiﬁcation of TF-speciﬁc and sensitive reporters
(A) Reporter conﬁdence levels are deﬁned based on the four threshold criteria mentioned in the boxes. Response to known TF perturbation is given a higher
weight due to its importance.
(B) Reporter conﬁdence scores of FOXA1 reporters. Reporter activity (in mESCs with overexpressed FOXA1), TF abundance correlation, or TF perturbation
response meeting the threshold criteria outlined in (A) contribute to the reporter conﬁdence level and are denoted by a plus sign.
(C) Overview of the conﬁdence level of the best reporter per TF for TFs with both synthetic and published reporters probed.
(D) Same as (C) but for TFs with only synthetic reporters probed. TP53 and NR3C1 are included in this list because their published reporters were not probed in
TP53/NR3C1 perturbation conditions, prohibiting comparisons between synthetic and published reporters.
(E) Same as (C) and (D) but for TFs for which only published reporters were included in the reporter library design.
(F) Reporter activity of the 62 prime reporters with consensus TFBS (blue dot) and mutated TFBS (gray dot). Activities displayed are from the same conditions as
used for the log-linear models.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024 1117

## Page 13

displayed high and interpretable reporter activities, correlated
with FOXA1 abundance, strongly responded to FOXA1 overexpression, and did not show an off-target response to FOXP1
KD (Figure S5B). As established previously (Figures 2D and
5G), these high-conﬁdence reporters are characterized by a
10-bp spacer length. We generated similar reporter conﬁdence
heatmaps for all 86 TFs (Data S1).
Finally, for TFs with reporters with a conﬁdence level of 2 or
higher, we selected a single prime reporter, based on the conﬁ-
dence scores and—in case of ties—additional performance
criteria (Table S4; see STAR methods). For a total of 62 TFs,
this yielded a prime reporter with conﬁdence levels 4 (11 TFs),
3 (33 TFs), or 2 (18 TFs). We emphasize that level 2 means that
the reporter is signiﬁcantly active and that there is evidence for
TF speciﬁcity, and thus such a reporter is likely to provide meaningful information. While most prime reporters feature a minCMV
or minHBG core promoter (46/62), the spacer sequences are
distributed relatively evenly across prime reporters (#1 [5 bp]:
11, #2 [5 bp]: 4, #3 [5 bp]: 8, #4 [10 bp]: 13, #5 [10 bp]: 9, #6
[10 bp]: 6), highlighting their TF-speciﬁc nature. This underscores
the necessity for TF-speciﬁc spacer sequence optimization.
Furthermore, the set of 62 prime reporters consists of 51 synthetic reporters and 11 published reporters. Notably, of the 38
TFs in the prime reporter set for which we probed both synthetic
and published reporters, synthetic reporters outperformed the
published reporters for 32 TFs (84%), while published reporters
outperformed the synthetic reporters for only 6 TFs (Figure 6C).
For 19 TFs, the synthetic prime reporters even scored at least
one conﬁdence level higher than the published reporters. This
demonstrates the value of systematic optimization. Additionally,
the prime set includes 19 TFs for which we did not test published
reporters, primarily because they were not available, (Figure 6D),
and ﬁve published reporters for which we did not test synthetic
designs (Figure 6E; Table S4).
As a ﬁnal characterization of the synthetic prime reporters,
we checked whether their activities are dependent on full integrity of the respective TFBSs (Figure 1B; Table S1). Indeed, of
the 49 synthetic prime reporters for which we had matched
mutated TFBS controls, 39 decreased their activity upon mutation of a 2–4 nucleotides in the TFBS (see Table S1) by at least
2-fold, and up to 450-fold (Figure 6F). Prime reporters also
had a signiﬁcantly increased sensitivity to these mutations
compared with reporters of the same TF with a lower conﬁ-
dence level (Figure S6). These strong responses to minimal alterations in the TFBS reafﬁrm the TF speciﬁcity of the identiﬁed
prime reporters. We note that the remaining ten reporters (of
which three are conﬁdence level 4, four level 3, and three level
2) should not be rejected based on this result because some
TFs might be able to activate a promoter stronger through
lowor
medium-afﬁnity
TFBSs
than
through
high-afﬁnity
TFBSs.32
Utilizing prime reporters for accurate multiplexed TF
activity detection
Having identiﬁed the prime reporters for 62 TFs, we reassessed
the activities of those TFs across all tested conditions. We ﬁrst
focused on the steady-state activities across the nine probed
cell lines (Figure S7A). To be able to compare reporters of
different strengths with each other, we rescaled the reporter
activities separately per TF. This allowed us to identify celltype speciﬁcities of TFs and to identify clusters of TFs with
similar activity patterns. We found a large number of TFs displaying distinct cell-type-speciﬁc activities, which match their
known biological functions (e.g., HNF4A in HEPG2, ESR1 in
MCF7, or SOX2 in mESC; Figures 7A and S7B). For HNF4A,
the cell-type speciﬁcity was more pronounced with the prime
reporters compared with the published reporters (Figure 7B).
The prime reporters also discriminate TFs with highly similar
TFBSs, such as GATA1/GATA4, TFCP2L1/GRHL1, EGR1/
KLF4, or a variety of nuclear receptor TFs (Figure 7A). Thus,
our set of 62 prime reporters can identify TF activity differences
between cell types and highlight functional similarities between TFs.
Besides steady-state activities, the prime reporters reveal
the dynamics of 62 TF activities across all tested 98 TF perturbation conditions. As an example, we quantiﬁed prime reporter
responses upon all KDs in HEPG2 cells with a strong effect on
their direct target (n = 21). We found a large number of TFs
that change their activity upon downregulation of another
TF (e.g., PAX6 activation upon HNF1A KD, Figure S7C).
These data offer a large resource to explore cascades of TF
activities.
We then focused our analysis on perturbations in mESCs that
affect the pluripotency network (Figure 7C). Interestingly, besides altering the activity of its cognate TF, most perturbations
led to strong secondary TF activity changes. For instance, we
found that degradation of key pluripotency factors POU5F1
and SOX2 substantially reduced the activity of other pluripotency
TFs such as STAT3, TFCP2L1, or KLF4, highlighting their core
function in the pluripotency network.38 Furthermore, removal of
JAK-STAT activator LIF not only led to strong inactivation of its
target STAT3 but also decreased the activity of WNT target
TCF7 as well as many other pluripotency TFs like SOX2 or
KLF4 (Figure 7C). This suggests that LIF is needed to maintain
pluripotency,
potentially
through
crosstalk
with
the
WNT
signaling pathway. Similarly, we found that MEK-ERK inhibitor
PD (PD0325901) crosstalks with WNT signaling and WNT activator CH (CHIR-99021) with MEK-ERK signaling, suggesting
that these signaling pathways reinforce each other and have
redundant targets, as has been discussed before.38,39 Besides
this, we found that addition of serum increased the activity of
pluripotency TFs such as POU5F1::SOX2, reinforcing the pluripotency network. Together, this analysis shows that multiplexed TF activity detection using prime reporters has the
potential to link targeted signaling pathway perturbations to
functional changes in TF activity to discover signaling pathway
interdependencies.
DISCUSSION
Multiple ways to deﬁne TF activity
In the living cell, the activity of a TF is highly context dependent
and inﬂuenced by factors such as interactions with other TFs,
co-factors, and the chromatin environment surrounding its target
sites. All available TF activity detection methods, either based on
computational inference from genomics data3,4,6–11 or on reporter assays as presented in this work, rely on certain assumptions to create a simpliﬁed deﬁnition of ‘‘TF activity.’’ Our
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
1118 Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024

## Page 14

reporters are driven by four copies of a single TFBS, and thus the
activity measured is reﬂecting the ability of the TF to bind to and
activate
from
that
particular
TFBS.
We
emphasize
that
this activity is not necessarily predictive of the activity of the
probed TF at individual natural promoters and enhancers in the
genome, which often involves combinatorial interactions with
other TFBSs.
Applicability of the identiﬁed prime reporters
We here present the systematic design and identiﬁcation of a
large collection of optimized ‘‘prime’’ TF reporters. This collection encompasses reporters that outperform currently available
reporters (e.g., VDR, SOX2, and PAX6), and reporters for TFs
for which no reliable
reporters
were available
yet (e.g.,
GATA4, TFCP2L1, and KLF4). The sequences of the prime reporter for each TF are documented in Table S4, which can be
used for various purposes. For instance, the prime reporters
can be used individually in a conventional ﬂuorescence/luminescence reporter assay to better characterize the role of single TFs in certain biological processes. Alternatively, the identiﬁed 62 prime reporters can be employed in a multiplexed
fashion, where each TF drives a unique barcode. A dedicated
small library consisting of only the prime reporters (with each
prime reporter coupled to at least ﬁve unique barcodes) can
be delivered as a plasmid pool or as a lentiviral library into
any cell line of interest. Given the low complexity of this library
(<500 barcodes for all 62 TFs including negative controls), highquality data may be retrieved even from hard-to-transfect cell
models such as organoids. This low complexity also enables
the detection of TF activities from a small number of cells, making it suitable for applications such as 96-well screens.
Signaling pathways could be challenged by an array of inhibitors or activators, similar to what has been done in this study,
to unveil novel roles of TFs in signaling pathways. Likewise, TF
responses can be tracked upon TF depletion to dissect TF-TF
communications. Potentially, this can also be done in single
cells and in time course experiments to detect cascades of
TF activities. Although the prime reporters are top-rated based
on our performance criteria, there may be instances where
other reporters with speciﬁc attributes are preferred for certain
TFs (e.g., high cell-type speciﬁcity or responsiveness to perturbation of related TFs). The heatmaps in Data S1 can aid in
Figure 7. Multiplexed detection of TF activities with prime reporters
(A) TF activities as measured by the 62 prime reporters across all nine probed cell lines. Activities were scaled by dividing the reporter activities by the maximum
activity per TF.
(B) Reporter activities (max-normalized) of the synthetic HNF4A prime reporter (red) and the highest-ranking published HNF4A reporter per cell line.
(C) Changes in prime reporter TF activities upon various TF perturbations in mESCs. TF targets of perturbations are indicated by black rectangles and asterisks.
Only TFs expressed in mESCs (nTPM > 4) and with a substantial perturbation response (fold-change > 2) in at least one condition are displayed. DEG,
degradation.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Systems 15, 1107–1122, December 18, 2024 1119

## Page 15

identifying such cases (e.g., for identifying generic STAT reporters instead of STAT3-speciﬁc reporters).
An alternative to TF activity inference
We envision that multiplexed TF reporter measurements could
complement indirect TF activity inference methods that rely on
ATAC-seq, ChIP-seq, or RNA-seq data.3,4,6–11 In contrast to
these whole-genome-sequencing-based inference methods,
low-complexity TF reporter assays allow screening of TF activities across many experimental conditions in parallel while remaining cost effective. Furthermore, while TF activity inference
methods are able to impute activities for any TF with a reliable
motif from commonly available datasets, they are not necessarily
predictive of transcriptional activity and remain inferential.14 TF
inference methods also often struggle to discern the activity of
individual TFs, instead reporting on the activity of TF clusters
sharing similar TFBSs.9,45 Multiplexed (prime) TF reporter assays
offer an orthogonal approach that provides functional evidence
of TF activity with high speciﬁcity for the candidate TF.
Increased TF speciﬁcity of prime reporters
We have shown that our synthetic reporters outperform published reporters for >80% of all comparisons. This underscores
that a subset of currently available reporters is suboptimal in
terms of sensitivity (e.g., VDR, PAX6, and NR1H4) or speciﬁcity
(e.g., CLOCK, TP53, and POU2F1). In comparison with published TF reporters, which rely on genomic response elements
or unoptimized synthetic designs, the designed prime reporters
exclusively contain TFBSs for the candidate TF and are highly
optimized to enable effective transcription. Through careful optimization of the spacer sequences between the TFBSs and the
choice of the core promoter, we were able to achieve reporters
with increased TF sensitivity and speciﬁcity. In some cases,
this even enabled us to identify speciﬁc reporters for TFs with
highly similar TFBSs (e.g., GATA1/GATA4 and TFCP2L1/
GRHL1). While we established prime reporters for 62 TFs,
good reporters for many other TFs are still lacking. For instance,
our set of TFs did not include a large number of important activator TFs that belong the basic domain or homeodomain TF superclass, many of which have non-unique binding motifs.28
These TFs can have crucial roles in development (e.g., HOX
TFs); hence, generating reporters for these TFs would be important to dissect the roles of TFs during differentiation. Although it
remains challenging to generate speciﬁc reporters for TFs with
non-unique TFBSs, careful optimization of TFBS spacer sequences and thorough evaluation of reporter responses to a variety of target TF and off-target TF perturbations could offer
solutions.
Importance of validation
We emphasize that we cannot guarantee that our reporters are
speciﬁc for a single TF in every cell type and under all conditions.
Reporters identiﬁed in this study with a conﬁdence level of two or
higher (i.e., all prime reporters) can be regarded as TF reporters
with evidence for TF speciﬁcity. Nevertheless, it should be kept
in mind that even these reporters were only tested within a speciﬁc set of experimental conditions and cell types. Therefore, we
recommend that future results obtained with our reporters in
other cell systems are carefully validated.
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be
directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the lead contact, Bas van Steensel (b.v.
steensel@nki.nl).
Materials availability
The TF reporter plasmid library generated in this study is available upon
request.
Data and code availability
d Laboratory notes and supplementary raw data are available at Zenodo
(DOI is listed in the key resources table).
d Original code and analysis pipelines are available at GitHub (https://
github.com/mtrauernicht/TF_MPRA). A released version of the GitHub
repository is available at Zenodo (DOI is listed in the key resources table).
d RNA-seq of the mNPCs, mESCs, and HEPG2 cells is available at the
Gene Expression Omnibus (accession number is listed in the key resources table).
d Raw sequencing data of the RNA-seq and all MPRAs is available at the
Sequence Read Archive (accession number is listed in the key resources table).
d Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this
paper is available from the lead contact upon request.